{\rtf1\ansi
\b Digital Certificate Verification System\par
\b0 Console-based Java Application using DAO Pattern\par
\par
\b Index / Table of Contents\b0\par
Abstract\par
1. Introduction\par
2. Objective of the Project\par
3. Scope of the Project\par
4. Problem Definition / Statement\par
5. Feasibility Study\par
5.1 Technical Feasibility\par
5.2 Economic Feasibility\par
5.3 Operational Feasibility\par
6. Existing System\par
7. Proposed System\par
8. System Requirements\par
8.1 Hardware Requirements\par
8.2 Software Requirements\par
9. System Design\par
9.1 Overall Architecture\par
9.2 Module Description\par
9.3 Data / Process Flow\par
10. Database Design\par
10.1 ER Diagram (Description)\par
10.2 Table Structures\par
11. Implementation Details\par
12. Coding (Overview)\par
13. Screenshots of Database\par
14. Application Screenshots\par
15. Testing\par
16. Security and Encryption Approach\par
17. Limitations\par
18. Future Enhancements\par
19. Conclusion\par
20. Bibliography / References\par
Appendix A: SQL Schema\par
Appendix B: Configuration and Build Files\par
Appendix C: Java Source Code Listings\par
\page
\b Abstract\b0\par
The Digital Certificate Verification System is a console-based Java 17 application that verifies the authenticity of digital certificates issued by educational institutions, companies, and government organizations. The system follows a layered architecture and uses the DAO (Data Access Object) pattern with JDBC and MySQL to store and verify certificates using a unique certificate ID. Administrators log in to the system, manage certificate records, and verify certificates quickly and reliably, reducing fraud and improving trust.\par
\page
\b 1. Introduction\b0\par
In the traditional method of certificate verification, organizations manually inspect physical certificates, signatures, and records. This process is slow, error-prone, and vulnerable to forgery. With the increasing use of digital documents, there is a strong need for a secure and centralized way to verify certificates.\par
The Digital Certificate Verification System provides a digital platform where issued certificates are stored in a central database and can be verified instantly using a unique certificate ID (which can also be encoded into a QR code on the certificate). The application is implemented as a Java console program following the DAO pattern, making it easy to understand, maintain, and extend.\par
\par
\b 2. Objective of the Project\b0\par
- To prevent certificate forgery by maintaining a secure central repository of issued certificates.\par
- To provide fast and reliable verification of certificates using a unique certificate ID.\par
- To allow authorized administrators to register, log in, and manage certificate records.\par
- To demonstrate clean, layered design using the DAO pattern and JDBC.\par
- To serve as a base that can later be extended to a full web-based system.\par
\par
\b 3. Scope of the Project\b0\par
The system supports:\par
- Administrator registration and login.\par
- Adding new certificates with details such as holder name, course, institution, issue date, and expiry date.\par
- Viewing, searching, updating, and deleting certificate records.\par
- Verifying certificates by certificate ID and reporting whether they are VALID, EXPIRED, or NOT VALID.\par
\par
The current version is console-based and does not include a graphical or web user interface, QR code generation/scanning, or advanced role management. These features are possible future enhancements.\par
\par
\b 4. Problem Definition / Statement\b0\par
Manual verification of certificates is time-consuming and vulnerable to forgery. Fake certificates can be produced easily using modern printing and editing tools, and it is difficult for organizations to distinguish genuine certificates from fraudulent ones using only visual inspection. There is a need for a central, tamper-resistant system where every issued certificate can be quickly verified using a unique identifier.\par
\par
\b 5. Feasibility Study\b0\par
\b 5.1 Technical Feasibility\b0\par
- Language: Java 17 (cross-platform, mature, and well supported).\par
- Database: MySQL (open-source, widely used, JDBC support).\par
- Architecture: Layered design (UI, Service, DAO, Model, Utility) with DAO pattern.\par
- Tools: Eclipse IDE, Maven, MySQL Workbench.\par
All required technologies are mature, well-documented, and freely available, so the project is technically feasible.\par
\par
\b 5.2 Economic Feasibility\b0\par
The system uses open-source tools and runs on standard hardware available in most institutions. There are no licensing costs for academic use. Hence, the project is economically feasible.\par
\par
\b 5.3 Operational Feasibility\b0\par
The application is menu-driven and easy to learn. Administrators can quickly perform login, registration, and certificate management tasks using simple numeric choices. Therefore, the system is operationally feasible.\par
\page
\b 6. Existing System\b0\par
In the existing manual system:\par
- Certificates are stored as physical documents.\par
- Verification is done by visually checking signatures and records.\par
- The process is slow, requires physical presence or email exchange, and is hard to audit.\par
- There is a high risk of fake or altered certificates passing as genuine.\par
\par
\b 7. Proposed System\b0\par
The proposed system stores all issued certificates in a MySQL database and allows instant verification using a unique certificate ID. Authorized administrators can log in, add new certificates, update or revoke them, and verify their validity from any machine connected to the database. This reduces fraud, saves time, and improves trust and transparency.\par
\page
\b 8. System Requirements\b0\par
\b 8.1 Hardware Requirements\b0\par
- Processor: Intel i3 or equivalent or higher.\par
- RAM: Minimum 4 GB.\par
- Storage: Minimum 2 GB free disk space.\par
\par
\b 8.2 Software Requirements\b0\par
- Operating System: Windows / Linux / macOS.\par
- JDK: Java 17 or later.\par
- Database: MySQL 8.x.\par
- IDE: Eclipse (or any Java IDE).\par
- Optional: Maven for build automation.\par
\page
\b 9. System Design\b0\par
\b 9.1 Overall Architecture\b0\par
The system is organized into the following layers and packages:\par
- app: application entry point.\par
- ui: console-based user interface classes.\par
- service: business logic and validation.\par
- dao: DAO interfaces.\par
- dao.jdbc: JDBC implementations of the DAOs.\par
- model: entity classes mapped to database tables.\par
- util: utility classes such as database connection and password hashing.\par
\par
Data flow for verification:\par
- The user interacts with AuthMenu for login/register.\par
- After authentication, the user interacts with ConsoleMenu.\par
- ConsoleMenu calls methods in CertificateService.\par
- CertificateService calls CertificateDao (implemented by CertificateDaoJdbcImpl).\par
- DAO interacts with the MySQL database via DBConnectionUtil.\par
\par
\b 9.2 Module Description\b0\par
- Authentication Module: manages admin registration and login using UserService and UserDao.\par
- Certificate Management Module: handles creation, listing, search, update, and deletion of certificates.\par
- Verification Module: verifies certificate IDs and determines whether they are ACTIVE, EXPIRED, or REVOKED.\par
- Database Utility Module: centralizes DB configuration and connection logic.\par
\par
\b 9.3 Data / Process Flow\b0\par
1. Admin registers with username and password.\par
2. Password is hashed and stored in the users table.\par
3. Admin logs in and, on success, accesses the certificate menu.\par
4. Admin performs CRUD operations on certificates.\par
5. For verification, the system loads the certificate by certificate_id, checks expiry and status, and prints a user-friendly result.\par
\page
\b 10. Database Design\b0\par
\b 10.1 ER Diagram (Description)\b0\par
Entities:\par
- User: id, username, password_hash, created_at.\par
- Certificate: id, certificate_id, holder_name, course_name, institution_name, issue_date, expiry_date, status, created_at, updated_at.\par
\par
In the current version, User and Certificate are independent entities. A future enhancement can add a relationship where a User issues many Certificates.\par
\par
\b 10.2 Table Structures\b0\par
Database: digital_certificates\par
\par
Table: users\par
- id BIGINT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY\par
- username VARCHAR(100) UNIQUE NOT NULL\par
- password_hash VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL\par
- created_at TIMESTAMP NOT NULL\par
\par
Table: certificates\par
- id BIGINT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY\par
- certificate_id VARCHAR(100) UNIQUE NOT NULL\par
- holder_name VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL\par
- course_name VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL\par
- institution_name VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL\par
- issue_date DATE NOT NULL\par
- expiry_date DATE NULL\par
- status VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL\par
- created_at TIMESTAMP NOT NULL\par
- updated_at TIMESTAMP NOT NULL\par
\page
\b 11. Implementation Details\b0\par
Technologies Used:\par
- Java 17\par
- MySQL\par
- JDBC\par
- DAO pattern\par
- Maven\par
\par
Package Structure:\par
- com.digitalcert.app\par
- com.digitalcert.ui\par
- com.digitalcert.service\par
- com.digitalcert.dao\par
- com.digitalcert.dao.jdbc\par
- com.digitalcert.model\par
- com.digitalcert.util\par
\page
\b 12. Coding (Overview)\b0\par
Key coding aspects:\par
- Separation of concerns through DAO interfaces and JDBC implementations.\par
- Service layer enforcing business rules (e.g., unique certificate IDs, status transitions to EXPIRED).\par
- UI layer responsible only for input/output via console.\par
- Use of PasswordUtil to hash passwords with SHA-256.\par
\page
\b 13. Screenshots of Database\b0\par
[Insert screenshot of digital_certificates database structure here]\par
[Insert screenshot of users table contents here]\par
[Insert screenshot of certificates table contents here]\par
\page
\b 14. Application Screenshots\b0\par
[Insert screenshot of Login / Register console screen here]\par
[Insert screenshot of main certificate menu here]\par
[Insert screenshot of add certificate flow here]\par
[Insert screenshot of verification result here]\par
\page
\b 15. Testing\b0\par
Example test cases:\par
- Login with valid credentials: expect success.\par
- Login with invalid password: expect failure.\par
- Register with existing username: expect error.\par
- Add certificate with valid data: expect success and record inserted.\par
- Search certificate by valid and invalid IDs.\par
- Verify certificate with ACTIVE status: expect VALID.\par
- Verify certificate with expired date: expect EXPIRED.\par
\page
\b 16. Security and Encryption Approach\b0\par
- Passwords are stored as SHA-256 hashes using PasswordUtil.\par
- Only authenticated administrators can access certificate operations.\par
- Database access is restricted via MySQL user credentials defined in db.properties.\par
- Future improvements can include SSL connections and field-level encryption.\par
\par
\b 17. Limitations\b0\par
- Console-based UI only.\par
- Single admin role; no fine-grained authorization.\par
- No QR code generation or scanning integration.\par
\par
\b 18. Future Enhancements\b0\par
- Web-based interface (REST API and web frontend).\par
- QR code generation and scanning for certificate IDs.\par
- Role-based access control (Admin, Verifier, Viewer).\par
- Email or SMS notifications.\par
\par
\b 19. Conclusion\b0\par
The Digital Certificate Verification System demonstrates a secure, layered, and maintainable approach to certificate verification. By replacing manual checks with a database-driven solution, the system improves speed, accuracy, and trust, and provides a strong foundation for further enhancements.\par
\par
\b 20. Bibliography / References\b0\par
- Java Documentation: https://docs.oracle.com/javase/\par
- MySQL Documentation: https://dev.mysql.com/doc/\par
- JDBC Tutorial: https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/jdbc/\par
\page
\b Appendix A: SQL Schema\b0\par
\par
database\\schema.sql\par
\par
-- Schema for Digital Certificate Verification System\par
-- MySQL example\par
-- Create database\par
CREATE DATABASE IF NOT EXISTS digital_certificates;\par
USE digital_certificates;\par
-- Table for application users (administrators)\par
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS users (\par
    id BIGINT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,\par
    username VARCHAR(100) NOT NULL UNIQUE,\par
    password_hash VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,\par
    created_at TIMESTAMP NOT NULL\par
);\par
-- Table for certificates\par
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS certificates (\par
    id BIGINT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,\par
    certificate_id VARCHAR(100) NOT NULL UNIQUE,\par
    holder_name VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,\par
    course_name VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,\par
    institution_name VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,\par
    issue_date DATE NOT NULL,\par
    expiry_date DATE NULL,\par
    status VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL,\par
    created_at TIMESTAMP NOT NULL,\par
    updated_at TIMESTAMP NOT NULL\par
);\par
\page
\b Appendix B: Configuration and Build Files\b0\par
\par
pom.xml\par
<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0"\par
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"\par
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">\par
    <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>\par
    <groupId>com.digitalcert</groupId>\par
    <artifactId>digital-certificate-verification-system</artifactId>\par
    <version>1.0-SNAPSHOT</version>\par
    <properties>\par
        <maven.compiler.source>17</maven.compiler.source>\par
        <maven.compiler.target>17</maven.compiler.target>\par
        <project.build.sourceEncoding>UTF-8</project.build.sourceEncoding>\par
    </properties>\par
    <dependencies>\par
        <dependency>\par
            <groupId>mysql</groupId>\par
            <artifactId>mysql-connector-java</artifactId>\par
            <version>8.0.33</version>\par
        </dependency>\par
    </dependencies>\par
    <build>\par
        <plugins>\par
            <plugin>\par
                <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>\par
                <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>\par
                <version>3.11.0</version>\par
                <configuration>\par
                    <source>17</source>\par
                    <target>17</target>\par
                </configuration>\par
            </plugin>\par
            <plugin>\par
                <groupId>org.codehaus.mojo</groupId>\par
                <artifactId>exec-maven-plugin</artifactId>\par
                <version>3.2.0</version>\par
                <configuration>\par
                    <mainClass>com.digitalcert.app.Main</mainClass>\par
                </configuration>\par
            </plugin>\par
        </plugins>\par
    </build>\par
</project>\par
\par
src\\main\\resources\\db.properties\par
db.url=jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/digital_certificates\par
db.username=root\par
db.password=Dheeraj@2004\par
\page
\b Appendix C: Java Source Code Listings\b0\par
\par
\b C.1 com.digitalcert.app.Main\b0\par
package com.digitalcert.app;\par
import com.digitalcert.dao.CertificateDao;\par
import com.digitalcert.dao.UserDao;\par
import com.digitalcert.dao.jdbc.CertificateDaoJdbcImpl;\par
import com.digitalcert.dao.jdbc.UserDaoJdbcImpl;\par
import com.digitalcert.service.CertificateService;\par
import com.digitalcert.service.UserService;\par
import com.digitalcert.ui.AuthMenu;\par
import com.digitalcert.ui.ConsoleMenu;\par
import com.digitalcert.util.DBConnectionUtil;\par
public class Main {\par
    public static void main(String[] args) {\par
        DBConnectionUtil dbConnectionUtil = new DBConnectionUtil();\par
        CertificateDao certificateDao = new CertificateDaoJdbcImpl(dbConnectionUtil);\par
        CertificateService certificateService = new CertificateService(certificateDao);\par
        UserDao userDao = new UserDaoJdbcImpl(dbConnectionUtil);\par
        UserService userService = new UserService(userDao);\par
        AuthMenu authMenu = new AuthMenu(userService);\par
        boolean authenticated = authMenu.start();\par
        if (!authenticated) {\par
            return;\par
        }\par
        ConsoleMenu consoleMenu = new ConsoleMenu(certificateService);\par
        consoleMenu.start();\par
    }\par
}\par
\par
\b C.2 com.digitalcert.ui.AuthMenu\b0\par
package com.digitalcert.ui;\par
import com.digitalcert.service.UserService;\par
import java.util.Scanner;\par
public class AuthMenu {\par
    private final UserService userService;\par
    private final Scanner scanner;\par
    public AuthMenu(UserService userService) {\par
        this.userService = userService;\par
        this.scanner = new Scanner(System.in);\par
    }\par
    public boolean start() {\par
        while (true) {\par
            printMenu();\par
            int choice = readInt("Enter your choice: ");\par
            switch (choice) {\par
                case 1 -> {\par
                    if (login()) {\par
                        return true;\par
                    }\par
                }\par
                case 2 -> register();\par
                case 3 -> {\par
                    System.out.println("Exiting application. Goodbye!");\par
                    return false;\par
                }\par
                default -> System.out.println("Invalid choice. Please try again.");\par
            }\par
        }\par
    }\par
    private void printMenu() {\par
        System.out.println("\\n=== Digital Certificate Verification System ===");\par
        System.out.println("1. Login");\par
        System.out.println("2. Register");\par
        System.out.println("3. Exit");\par
    }\par
    private boolean login() {\par
        System.out.println("\\n-- Login --");\par
        System.out.print("Username: ");\par
        String username = scanner.nextLine();\par
        System.out.print("Password: ");\par
        String password = scanner.nextLine();\par
        boolean authenticated = userService.authenticate(username, password);\par
        if (authenticated) {\par
            System.out.println("Login successful. Welcome, " + username + "!");\par
            return true;\par
        } else {\par
            System.out.println("Invalid username or password.");\par
            return false;\par
        }\par
    }\par
    private void register() {\par
        System.out.println("\\n-- Register --");\par
        System.out.print("Choose a username: ");\par
        String username = scanner.nextLine();\par
        System.out.print("Choose a password: ");\par
        String password = scanner.nextLine();\par
        try {\par
            userService.register(username, password);\par
            System.out.println("Registration successful. You can now log in.");\par
        } catch (RuntimeException ex) {\par
            System.out.println("Registration failed: " + ex.getMessage());\par
        }\par
    }\par
    private int readInt(String prompt) {\par
        while (true) {\par
            System.out.print(prompt);\par
            String line = scanner.nextLine();\par
            try {\par
                return Integer.parseInt(line.trim());\par
            } catch (NumberFormatException ex) {\par
                System.out.println("Invalid number. Please try again.");\par
            }\par
        }\par
    }\par
}\par
\par
\b C.3 com.digitalcert.ui.ConsoleMenu\b0\par
... (ConsoleMenu.java full source as in project)\par
\par
\b C.4 com.digitalcert.service.UserService\b0\par
... (UserService.java full source as in project)\par
\par
\b C.5 com.digitalcert.service.CertificateService\b0\par
... (CertificateService.java full source as in project)\par
\par
\b C.6 com.digitalcert.dao and com.digitalcert.dao.jdbc\b0\par
... (CertificateDao, UserDao, CertificateDaoJdbcImpl, UserDaoJdbcImpl full sources)\par
\par
\b C.7 com.digitalcert.model\b0\par
... (Certificate.java and User.java full sources)\par
\par
\b C.8 com.digitalcert.util\b0\par
... (DBConnectionUtil.java and PasswordUtil.java full sources)\par
}

{\rtf1\ansi
\b Digital Certificate Verification System\b0\line
(Console-Based Java Application using DAO Pattern)\line
\line
\b Index\b0\line
1. Introduction\line
2. Objective of the Project\line
3. Scope of the Project\line
4. Feasibility Study (Technical, Economic, Operational)\line
5. Existing System\line
6. Proposed System\line
7. System Requirements (Hardware & Software)\line
8. System Design\line
8.1 Overall Architecture\line
8.2 Module Description\line
8.3 Data Flow / Process Flow\line
9. Database Design\line
9.1 ER Diagram\line
9.2 Table Structures\line
10. Implementation Details (Technologies & Code Structure)\line
11. Coding Snapshots\line
12. Screenshots of Database\line
13. Application Screenshots\line
14. Testing\line
15. Security & Encryption Approach (Conceptual)\line
16. Limitations\line
17. Future Enhancements\line
18. Conclusion\line
19. Bibliography / References\line
\page
\b 1. Introduction\b0\line
The Digital Certificate Verification System is a console-based Java application that verifies the authenticity of digital certificates issued by educational institutions, companies, and government organizations. The system follows the DAO (Data Access Object) pattern and uses JDBC with MySQL to manage data securely.\line
\line
Traditionally, certificate verification is performed manually by checking physical documents, which is time-consuming, prone to human error, and vulnerable to forgery. This project automates the verification process using unique certificate IDs (which can be encoded as QR codes) stored in a secure database. Administrators can add, update, delete, and verify certificates through a text-based interface.\line
\page
\b 2. Objective of the Project\b0\line
- To prevent certificate forgery by maintaining a secure, central repository of issued certificates.\line
- To provide fast and reliable verification of digital certificates using a unique certificate ID or QR code content.\line
- To enable authorized administrators to register, log in, and manage certificates.\line
- To demonstrate layered software design using the DAO pattern, separating presentation, business logic, and data access.\line
- To provide a reference console application that can later be extended to a full web-based system.\line
\page
\b 3. Scope of the Project\b0\line
The scope of this project includes:\line
- A Java 17 console application with menu-driven navigation.\line
- User authentication (admin login and registration).\line
- Certificate management: add, view, search, update, and delete certificates.\line
- Certificate verification using certificate ID.\line
- MySQL database for secure storage of users and certificates.\line
- Use of DAO pattern to abstract database operations and allow easy future changes.\line
\line
Out of scope for this version:\line
- Real QR code scanning (ID is manually typed).\line
- Web UI.\line
- Advanced role management.\line
- Full-field encryption of all data.\line
\page
\b 4. Feasibility Study\b0\line
\b 4.1 Technical Feasibility\b0\line
- Programming Language: Java 17.\line
- Database: MySQL.\line
- Architecture: Layered design (UI \emdash Service \emdash DAO \emdash DB) with DAO pattern.\line
- Tools/IDE: Eclipse or any Java IDE.\line
All technologies are mature and available freely; the project is technically feasible.\line
\line
\b 4.2 Economic Feasibility\b0\line
- Uses open-source tools (Java, MySQL, Maven).\line
- No license costs for academic use.\line
- Hardware requirements are minimal.\line
Therefore the project is economically feasible.\line
\line
\b 4.3 Operational Feasibility\b0\line
- Application is menu-driven and easy to learn.\line
- Suitable for use in college labs or small organizations.\line
\page
\b 5. Existing System\b0\line
In the existing manual system:\line
- Certificates are printed on paper and verified by checking seals, signatures, and records.\line
- Verification requires physical presence or sharing scanned copies.\line
- The process is slow, labor-intensive, and not centralized.\line
- There is a high risk of forgery and duplication.\line
\page
\b 6. Proposed System\b0\line
The proposed Digital Certificate Verification System:\line
- Stores all issued certificates in a central database with a unique certificate ID.\line
- Allows administrators to register, log in, and manage certificates via console.\line
- Provides instant verification by entering the certificate ID.\line
- Uses statuses such as ACTIVE, EXPIRED, and REVOKED.\line
- Can be extended to web and QR-based verification in the future.\line
\page
\b 7. System Requirements\b0\line
\b 7.1 Hardware Requirements\b0\line
- Processor: Intel i3 or above / equivalent.\line
- RAM: Minimum 4 GB.\line
- Hard Disk: Minimum 2 GB free space.\line
\line
\b 7.2 Software Requirements\b0\line
- Operating System: Windows / Linux / macOS.\line
- JDK: Java 17 or later.\line
- Database: MySQL 8.x.\line
- IDE: Eclipse or any Java IDE.\line
- Build Tool (optional): Maven.\line
\page
\b 8. System Design\b0\line
\b 8.1 Overall Architecture\b0\line
Layers:\line
- UI Layer (app, ui): Main, AuthMenu, ConsoleMenu.\line
- Service Layer: UserService, CertificateService.\line
- DAO Layer: UserDao, CertificateDao, UserDaoJdbcImpl, CertificateDaoJdbcImpl.\line
- Model Layer: User, Certificate.\line
- Utility Layer: DBConnectionUtil, PasswordUtil.\line
\line
\b 8.2 Module Description\b0\line
- Authentication Module: handles registration and login with hashed passwords.\line
- Certificate Management Module: CRUD operations on certificates.\line
- Verification Module: verifies certificates and updates status to EXPIRED when necessary.\line
- Database Utility Module: centralizes DB configuration and connections.\line
\line
\b 8.3 Data / Process Flow (Textual)\b0\line
1. User chooses Register or Login.\line
2. After successful login, user accesses certificate menu.\line
3. UI collects input and calls Service layer.\line
4. Service validates and calls DAO.\line
5. DAO executes SQL queries on MySQL and returns results.\line
\page
\b 9. Database Design\b0\line
\b 9.1 ER Diagram (Description)\b0\line
Entities:\line
- User: id, username, password_hash, created_at.\line
- Certificate: id, certificate_id, holder_name, course_name, institution_name, issue_date, expiry_date, status, created_at, updated_at.\line
\line
In this version, User and Certificate are independent. Optionally, a relation such as \"User issues many Certificates\" can be added later.\line
\line
\b 9.2 Table Structures\b0\line
Table: users\line
- id BIGINT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY\line
- username VARCHAR(100) UNIQUE NOT NULL\line
- password_hash VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL\line
- created_at TIMESTAMP NOT NULL\line
\line
Table: certificates\line
- id BIGINT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY\line
- certificate_id VARCHAR(100) UNIQUE NOT NULL\line
- holder_name VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL\line
- course_name VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL\line
- institution_name VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL\line
- issue_date DATE NOT NULL\line
- expiry_date DATE NULL\line
- status VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL\line
- created_at TIMESTAMP NOT NULL\line
- updated_at TIMESTAMP NOT NULL\line
\page
\b 10. Implementation Details\b0\line
Technologies Used:\line
- Language: Java 17.\line
- Database: MySQL.\line
- Persistence: JDBC.\line
- Pattern: DAO (Data Access Object).\line
- IDE: Eclipse.\line
\line
Package Structure:\line
- com.digitalcert.app\line
- com.digitalcert.ui\line
- com.digitalcert.service\line
- com.digitalcert.dao\line
- com.digitalcert.dao.jdbc\line
- com.digitalcert.model\line
- com.digitalcert.util\line
\page
\b 11. Coding Snapshots (Examples)\b0\line
Example: Certificate model (excerpt)\line
public class Certificate {\line
    private Long id;\line
    private String certificateId;\line
    private String holderName;\line
    private String courseName;\line
    private String institutionName;\line
    private LocalDate issueDate;\line
    private LocalDate expiryDate;\line
    private String status;\line
}\line
\line
Example: DAO interface (excerpt)\line
public interface CertificateDao {\line
    Certificate save(Certificate certificate);\line
    Optional\cf1 <\cf0 Certificate\cf1 >\cf0  findById(long id);\line
    Optional\cf1 <\cf0 Certificate\cf1 >\cf0  findByCertificateId(String certificateId);\line
}\line
\page
\b 12. Screenshots of Database\b0\line
In the final report, include screenshots of:\line
- digital_certificates database in MySQL.\line
- users table contents after registration.\line
- certificates table contents after adding certificates.\line
\page
\b 13. Application Screenshots\b0\line
Include console screenshots of:\line
- Login and Register screen.\line
- Successful registration.\line
- Successful login.\line
- Certificate management menu.\line
- Verification result for a valid certificate.\line
\page
\b 14. Testing\b0\line
Example test cases:\line
- Login with valid credentials: expect success.\line
- Login with invalid password: expect failure.\line
- Register existing username: expect error.\line
- Add certificate with valid data: expect success and DB insert.\line
- Verify certificate with valid ID: expect \"VALID\".\line
- Verify certificate with invalid ID: expect \"NOT VALID\".\line
\page
\b 15. Security & Encryption Approach\b0\line
- Passwords are stored as SHA-256 hashes, not plain text.\line
- Only authenticated administrators can perform certificate operations.\line
- Database security can be enhanced with MySQL permissions and SSL.\line
\page
\b 16. Limitations\b0\line
- Console-based UI only, no GUI or web interface.\line
- Simple password policy.\line
- No detailed audit logging.\line
- Manual entry of certificate ID instead of real QR scanning.\line
\page
\b 17. Future Enhancements\b0\line
- Web-based interface (e.g., Spring Boot, HTML/JS frontend).\line
- QR code generation and scanning integration.\line
- Role-based access control.\line
- Email/SMS notifications.\line
- Advanced encryption for stored data.\line
\page
\b 18. Conclusion\b0\line
The Digital Certificate Verification System demonstrates a secure, layered, and maintainable approach to certificate verification. By replacing manual checks with a database-driven solution, the system improves speed, accuracy, and trust. The use of Java, the DAO pattern, and MySQL makes the solution portable and extensible for future enhancements such as a full web interface and QR code integration.\line
\page
\b 19. Bibliography / References\b0\line
- Official Java documentation: https://docs.oracle.com/javase/\line
- MySQL documentation: https://dev.mysql.com/doc/\line
- JDBC tutorial: https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/jdbc/\line
}

